OSDOCS#2429: documenting how updates work (#60091)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/update-manifest-application.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="update-manifest-application_{context}"]
= Understanding how manifests are applied during an update

> Some manifests supplied in a release image need to be applied in a certain order because of the dependencies between them.

Reviewer: >the CVO applies must apply 

The CVO applies

@dfitzmau  right?

> Some manifests supplied in a release image need to be applied in a certain order because of the dependencies between them.

Author: Per the IBM style guide:

"Passive voice is acceptable when any of these conditions are true:

- The system performs the action.
- It is more appropriate to focus on the receiver of the action.
- You want to avoid blaming the user for an error, such as in an error message.
- The information is clearer in passive voice."

I think the first (and even the second) bullet point applies here, and I think it might read better if the lengthy noun phrase "manifests supplied in a release image" is towards the beginning of the sentence rather than the middle.

For those reasons I'd prefer to keep it in passive, but please let me know if you disagree. 
I will, however, replace "need to" with "must" as that's the preferred word per the style guide.

For example, the `CustomResourceDefinition` resource must be created before the matching custom resources.
Additionally, there is a logical order in which the individual Cluster Operators need to be updated to minimize disruption in the cluster.

> The Cluster Version Operator implements this logical order through the concept of Runlevels.

Author: Just got feedback from the team that the first mention of abbreviated terms _in each distinct section_ need to take the following form you suggest, and then following uses in that section can be abbreviated. I'll do a passthrough of the entire PR to follow that standard

These dependencies are encoded in the filenames of the manifests in the release image:

[source, terminal]
----
0000_<runlevel>_<component>_<manifest-name>.yaml
----

> For example:

Reviewer: s/need to/must (per ISG)

Do we need to define what _Runlevels_ are?

> For example:

Author: Do we ever use multiple callout labels within a single line of code? 

I see your point about multiple examples but I think combining the two would create a disjointed and hard to read line of code, as the content within the line would keep getting broken up and interrupted by a label. I feel that having the clean, uninterrupted example below is helpful for users

[source, terminal]
----
0000_03_config-operator_01_proxy.crd.yaml
----

> The CVO internally builds a dependency graph for the manifests, obeying the following rules:

Author: I think it's the CVO obeying the following rules when building the dependency graph. Here's a rewrite that might resolve this, let me know if it needs further changing:

`The CVO internally builds a dependency graph for the manifests, where the CVO obeys the following rules:`

cc @petr-muller @wking in case this breaks technical accuracy

> * During an update, manifests at a lower Runlevel will be applied before those at a higher Runlevel.

Reviewer: Or, _are applied_? 
_the CVO applies manifests at a lower Runlevel before..._?

> * During an update, manifests at a lower Runlevel will be applied before those at a higher Runlevel.

Author: Per Michael's suggestion I'll go with:

"manifests at a lower Runlevel are applied before..."

> * Within one Runlevel, manifests for different components may be applied in parallel.

Reviewer: s/may/might or can

> * Within one Runlevel, manifests for a single component will be applied in lexicographic order.

Reviewer: s/will be/are

The CVO then applies manifests following the generated dependency graph.

> For some resource types, the CVO monitors the resource after its manifest is applied, and only considers it to be successfully updated after the resource reaches a stable state.

Reviewer: s/only considers it to be successfully updated after.../considers it to be successfully updated only after...
The _only_ should be next to the term it modifies, here _after_.

Or, remove _only_. Not sure you need it.

> Achieving this state can take some time.

Reviewer: s/state/stable state ??

> This is especially true for Cluster Operators, which may perform their own update actions in the cluster after the CVO deploys their new versions.

Reviewer 2: nit: this is cheating a bit, which may be fine.  The structure is:

*  A component, e.g. "etcd".
  * [Assorted CVO-deployed manifests for that component][1], including:
    * [An operator Deployment][2].
    * [An associated ClusterOperator][3].
    * A bunch of other stuff (namespaces, RBAC, ServiceMonitors, etc.), possibly spread across multiple runlevels.  [Etcd is currently split][1] between levels 20 for the core componet and 90 for monitoring resources.
  * Other in-cluster resources created by the operator, once it starts running.

When you say "Cluster Operators" here, it's not clear if you mean "the whole component", "the set of all CVO-deployed manifests for that component", or "just [the ClusterOperator manifest][3]".  In the context of updates, the timing is usually:

1. CVO updates a bunch of resources like [the operator Deployment][2].
2. The updated component operator pods roll out their new version, and eventually update their ClusterOperator `status` to claim completion.
3. The CVO is not touching [the component's ClusterOperator][3], but is blocking on that manifest, until it is [satisfied][4] with the status.

Maybe we could rephrase with:

> Achieving this state can take some time, especially for ClusterOperator resources, when the CVO is waiting for a component operator to update its component and update its ClusterOperator `status`.

or something.

Also unclear to me if we are using "Cluster Operator" or "ClusterOperator" to refer to the ClusterOperator resources.  The current text seems to use both forms, and while there's no need to be perfectly consistent, the inconsistency may be contributing to my confusion over the precise meaning of "Cluster Operator".

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/tree/c6c625427d4db4b26217dc304c2944df585fbb19/manifests
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/blob/c6c625427d4db4b26217dc304c2944df585fbb19/manifests/0000_20_etcd-operator_06_deployment.yaml
[3]: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/blob/c6c625427d4db4b26217dc304c2944df585fbb19/manifests/0000_20_etcd-operator_07_clusteroperator.yaml
[4]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/a0482b15dfb9338ebbd6e7c6d711302febf78b99/dev-guide/cluster-version-operator/user/reconciliation.md#clusteroperator

Author: I'll save both feedback items in this comment for a second iteration.

Reviewer: s/may perform/might perform

> This is especially true for Cluster Operators, which may perform their own update actions in the cluster after the CVO deploys their new versions.

Reviewer: s/may perform/might perform

> Such Cluster Operators will set their Progressing condition to True to signal they are working towards the state desired after the update.

Author: I will try the following, let me know if there's a problem with this option:

"While the additional update actions take place, these Cluster Operators will temporarily set their `Progressing` condition to `True`."

> While the additional update actions take place, these Cluster Operators will temporarily set their `Progressing` condition to `True`.

Reviewer: s/will temporarily/temporarily

> The CVO waits until all Cluster Operators in the Runlevel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CVO waits until all Cluster Operators in the Runlevel meet the following conditions:
```
Or similar, per ISG: [use complete sentences to introduce lists and not phrases](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-lists#lead-in-wording)

> The CVO waits until all Cluster Operators in the Runlevel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CVO waits until all Cluster Operators in the Runlevel meet the following conditions:
```
Or similar, per ISG: [use complete sentences to introduce lists and not phrases](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-lists#lead-in-wording)

> * Are Available=True,

Reviewer: I think these two need markup??

`Are Available=True`
`Are Degraded=False`

Do we need to mention where/how these values can be found?

Author: I'll put the conditions in markup, thanks. I do not think that this descriptive doc about how updates work needs information about where to find these conditions, but I could be wrong. cc @petr-muller

> * Are Degraded=False, and

Reviewer 2: This [does not apply during the install phase][1].  And [maybe one day it won't apply at all][2].  Is it worth committing ourselves in formal docs, vs. handwaving about the CVO caring about _something_ in the ClusterOperator `status`?

This also tiptoes up against the current "Understanding how manifests are applied during an update" scoping.  You currently have "During an update, manifests at a lower Runlevel..." which acknowledges the presence of non-update CVO modes.  Does that mean we should acknowledge the install mode in this line?  Or should we consistently exclude all non-update modes?  Personally, I think folks often forget that the CVO is constantly reconciling the state of its managed manifests with the in-cluster resources, regardless of whether an update is going on.  And acknowledging that makes it more clear why `oc adm upgrade` and similar UIs can be used to check in on cluster state regardless of whether you're mid-update or not.  But it also takes some time to discuss the other modes, and if a customer does happen to be update-mode focused, the other-mode discussion will be distracting.  ⚖️🤷🔮

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/a0482b15dfb9338ebbd6e7c6d711302febf78b99/dev-guide/cluster-version-operator/user/reconciliation.md#clusteroperator
[2]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OTA-540

Reviewer 3: >  Is it worth committing ourselves in formal docs, vs. handwaving about the CVO caring about something in the ClusterOperator status?

So in this case I'd argue for being explicit, because it helps understanding why exactly is CVO waiting on something (because CVO itself does not communicate it via our UIs, it jsut says "waiting in X-operator".

About the non-upgrade mode... You're making a really good point. In hindsight, maybe the doc could have been structured differently? We could have a section on "Cluster Version Operator is an operator that is active all the time and works like this", and then we could have a section that would explain how update is just an interest-worthy case of quite standard CVO operation. I'd like such doc! But I think we went a different route and in the current strucutre we may want to keep the focus on the upgrading mode.

> * Declare they have achieved the desired version in their ClusterOperator resource

Reviewer: Per ISG: [Use list items that are grammatically parallel](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-lists#wording-of-list-items).
 
You can't have a list with items and full sentences. Not sure how to fix.

* The Operator reports the `Are Available=True` condition.
* The Operator reports the `Are Degraded=False` condition.
* The Operator declares it achieved the desired version in their `ClusterOperator` object

Author: I did "The Cluster Operators have a ..." for the first two bullets and "The Cluster Operators declare..." for the last one.

> before it proceeds to the following Runlevel.

Author: I moved this clause up to the sentence that introduces the list, since it technically relates to that phrase

> Some actions can take significant time to finish, but the CVO needs to wait on their completion to ensure the following Runlevels can proceed safely.

Reviewer: _the following Runlevels_ suggests to me that you are listing the Runlevels. 
What actions do you mean?
I'm not sure this is a _but_ situation (seems a bit negative).  Maybe two sentences?

```suggestion
Some actions can take significant time to finish. The CVO waits for the actions to complete in order to ensure the next Runlevel can proceed safely.
```

Author: I switched "following" with "subsequent" to avoid this confusion, let me know if that doesn't work for you

The process of applying all manifests is expected to take 60 to 120 minutes in total; see *Understanding {product-title} update duration* for more information about factors that influence update duration.

> image::update-runlevels.png[A diagram displaying the sequence of Runlevels and the manifests of components within each level]

Reviewer 2: Can we document how this PNG was generated in the commit message, to ease the onboarding of anyone who needs to update it in the future?  Even if the commit message says "The PNG was a one-off, just do your own thing if you need to replace it" or something, that would keep a future docs-writer from wondering if they were reinventing an existing process.

In the example diagram above, the CVO is waiting until all work is completed at Runlevel 20.

> It has applied all manifests, but the `kube-apiserver-operator ClusterOperator` is performing some actions after its new version was deployed, and declares this through the `Progressing=True` condition and by not declaring the new version as reconciled in its `status.versions`.

Reviewer: >and by not declaring the new version as reconciled in its `status.versions`.
>and not by declaring the new version as reconciled in its `status.versions`.
These two phrases mean different things. Which is correct?

> The CVO waits until it is satisfied with the ClusterOperator status, and then it will start applying manifests at Runlevel 25.

Reviewer: _satisfied_ seems like anthromorphism. Do we know what makes the CVO satisfied? 

> The CVO waits until the ClusterOperator reaches <blah> status

Author: I believe it's satisfied when that Operator reports `Progressing=False` and sets its `status.versions` to the same version implemented through the applied manifests.

I can try a rewrite such as the following: "The CVO waits until the ClusterOperator reports an acceptable status, and then...."

cc @petr-muller

Reviewer: SGTM!

Reviewer 3: SGTM too
